# Fundamentals of a program

## Basics

- The approach or method that is used to solve the problem is known as an algorithm
- So, if we were to create a program that tests if a number is odd or even
- The statements that solve the problem becomes the program
- The method that is used to test if the number is even or odd is the algorithm
- To write a program, you need to write the instructions necessary to implement the algorithm
- These instructions would be expressed in the statements of a particular computer
  language, such as Java, C++, Objective-C, or C

## Terminology

- **CPU (Central Processing Unit):** Performs the majority of computing work, executing instructions.
- **RAM (Random Access Memory):** Temporarily stores a program's data during runtime.
- **Hard Drive (Permanent Storage):** Stores program source code files even when the computer is off.
- **Operating System:** Manages computer resources, handles program execution, and facilitates user interactions (e.g., Windows, Unix, Android).
- **Fetch/Execute Cycle:** The life cycle of a CPU, where it fetches instructions from memory and executes them.

Learn more about Systems Architecture on [BBC Bitesize](https://www.bbc.co.uk/bitesize/guides/z7qqmsg/revision/1).


## Fetch / Execute Cycle

The fetch-execute cycle (also known as fetch-decode-execute cycle) is
followed by a processor i to process an instruction . The cycle consists of
several stages.

1. The memory i address held in the program counteri is copied into the
   MAR 6.
2. The address in the program counter is then incremented - increased - by one.
   The program counter now holds the address of the next instruction to be
   fetched.
3. The processor sends a signal along the address bus i to the memory address
   held in the MAR.
4. The instruction/data held in that memory address is sent along the data bus
   to the MBR/MDR6.
5. The instruction/data held in the MBR/MDR is copied into the CIR 6.
6. The instruction/data held in the CIR is decoded and then executed. Results of
   processing are stored in the ACC6.
7. The cycle then returns to step one.

## Higher Level Programming Languages

- High-level programming languages make it easier to write programs
    - Opposite of assembly language
    - C is a higher level programming language that describes actions in a more abstract form
    - the instructions (statements) of a program look more like problem solving steps
    - do not have to worry about the precise steps a particular CPU would have to take to accomplish a particular task
        - total = x + vs. mv ax, 5, mv cx 4, etc.
    - high-level languages are easier to learn and much easier to program in than are machine languages
- Compilers
    - a program that translates the high-level language source code into the detailed set of machine language
      instructions the computer requires
    - the program does the high-level thinking and the compiler generates the tedious instructions to the cpu
    - Compilers will also check that your program has valid syntax for the programming language that you are
      compiling
    - finds errors and it reports them to you and doesn't produce an executable until you fix them

## Steps in writing a program

1. Define the Program Objectives
    - Understand the requirements of the program
    - Get a clear idea of what you want the program to accomplish
2. Design
    - Decide how the program will meet the above requirements
    - What should the user interface be like?
    - How should the program be organized?
3. Write the Code
    - Start implementation, translate the design in the syntax of C
    - you need to use a text editor to create what is called a source code file
4. Compile
    - translate the source code into machine code (executable code)
    - consists of detailed instructions to the CPU expressed in a numeric code
5. Run the Program
    - the executable file is a program you can run
6. Test and Debug
    - Just because a program is running, does not mean it works as intended
    - Need to test, to see that your program does what it is supposed to do (may find bugs)
        - Debugging is the process of finding and fixing program errors
        - Making mistakes is a natural part of learning
7. Maintain and Modify the Program
    - Programs are released and used by many people
    - have to continue to fix new bugs or add new features
    - For the above steps, you may have to jump around steps and repeat steps
        - E.g. when you are writing code, you might find that your plan was impractical

> **Many new programmers ignore steps 1 and 2 and go directly to writing code**

- A big mistake for larger programs, may be ok for very simple programs
- the larger and more complex the program is, the more planning it requires
- should develop the habit of planning before coding
- Also, while you are coding, you always want to work in small steps and constantly test
  (divide and conquer)